           

Now the honor which we pay to God in return belongs to the virtue of religion, and the honor with which we repay our parents belongs to the virtue of piety. Therefore thankfulness or gratitude is not distinct from the other virtues.

Now the purpose of giving thanks is repayment (Ethic. 5,4). Therefore thanksgiving, which belongs to gratitude, is an act of justice. Therefore gratitude is not a special virtue, distinct from other virtues.

Now friendship is associated with all the virtues, since they are the reason for which man is loved. Therefore thankfulness or gratitude, to which it belongs to repay favors received, is not a special virtue.

the cause of debt is found primarily and chiefly in God, in that He is the first principle of all our goods: secondarily it is found in our father, because he is the proximate principle of our begetting and upbringing:

thirdly it is found in the person that excels in dignity, from whom general favors proceed

fourthly it is found in a benefactor, from whom we have received particular and private favors, on account of which we are under particular obligation to him.

Just as religion is superexcelling piety, so is it excelling thankfulness or gratitude:

 But the repayment that belongs to the virtue of thankfulness or gratitude answers to the moral debt, and is paid spontaneously.

. In this way friendship is preserved by repayment of favors, although repayment of favors belongs specially to the virtue of gratitude.

so that when there is greater favor on the part of the giver, greater thanks are due on the part of the recipient.

grace. Wherefore, although the gift bestowed on the innocent is, considered absolutely, greater, yet the gift bestowed on the penitent is greater in relation to him:

"just as a man is liberal who gives not to himself but to others, and gracious who forgives not himself but others, and merciful who is moved, not by his own misfortunes but by another's, so too, no man confers a favor on himself, he is but following the bent of his nature, which moves him to resist what hurts him, and to seek what is profitable."

Wherefore if someone has conferred a favor, not as he ought to have conferred it, the recipient should not for that reason withhold his thanks. Yet he owes less thanks, than if the favor had been conferred duly, since in fact the favor is less,

"If he has done it for me in common with himself, having both of us in his mind, I am ungrateful and not merely unjust, unless I rejoice that what was profitable to him is profitable to me also. It is the height of malevolence to refuse to recognize a kindness, unless the giver has been the loser thereby."

Wherefore gratitude is due even to a slave, when he does more than his duty.

can. For since kindness depends on the heart rather than on the deed, so too gratitude depends chiefly the heart.

As stated in the preceding reply, repayment of a favor depends chiefly on the affection of the heart: