# Dr Mustafa Ceric
**Former Grand Mufti of Bosnia and Herzegovina


Met Al-Attas 1993, while 1.425 days/nights besieged in Bosnia, 11k people killed. 

_islamization of knowledge_
Two thing to have in minds;
1. distinction between here history and human history
2. a

Adam is father of humanity. But Abraham is the father of hanafiyah faith, Abrahamic faith. Musa got 10 commandments. Isa had another challenges, misinterpreting him as son of God. Muhammad as last prophet, reinterpret the history through revelation, such Ulul Azmi, who change the history of humanity. Muhammad explained with his prophecy, as Nabiy who gets revelation, as Rasul to tell the prophecy,.

God gave challenge to humanity with amanah, that rejected by mountains, but accepted by man. Men thought he can accept the challenge while still dumb. So then come the prophecy, by Quran as guide to live on planet happily. In Makkah revealed aqeedah and in Madinah focused at sharia.

_Jauharul insan, aql, qalb, nafs, ruh, hadza yuatab wa yuaqab._ not the physical body, but the soul will be responsible from world’s actions. Aqidah as the foundation of religion. Aqidah is personal thing, cannot be inherited, but gotten from experiences and knowledges. Abraham cannot pas faith to his father, Noah to his child. Everyone must be mujtahid in aqidah, not as muqallid. But in fiqh, you may be as muqallid. You cannot inherited faith from your shaikh.

When Muhammad passed away, revelation door had been closed. Every khalifah rashidah understands it. Muhammad got charisma, can be translated to turath-revelation, as he had followers and change the social order. Max Weber uses charisma to refer to Christ. Charisma had stages: routinitation, perpetuation, dissemination of charisma. 

Prophet left nothing of mirath but knowledges and shahadah, that inherited by ulama: fuqaha, muhaddis, sufiyah. Can we apply Max Weber? Routinitation is Sunni, perpetuation is Shia, dissemination is Khariji. 

Now we have to focus to routinitation of Islam with the peak of khilafah. Islam is not only aqidah sharia, but also civil society, that is khilafa. It is not shurut iman, as Shia did. Sharia must only applied to muslim community, not for all, with keeping 5 dharuriyat. Hfdz Aql is not intellect, but freedom. 

Khilafafh moves to madinah, Kufah, Dimask, then Baghdad, to Cairo, and finally ends in Istanbul, Turkey. Until WW1, Muslim still had global civil society. Ottoman joined lately in WW1 and then lost. All parts of Ottoman divided and wanted to separate  from Ottoman as its lost. Nation state or nationality become new religion made by Hitler. So state is made by nationality, not religion. Muslim had no guide anymore how to run state. That is the path to secularization as realized by Ataturk to be secular nation. 

1967 Israel in six days won over Muslim countries. Muslim had to choices: secularization like Western, or Re-ISlamization of muslim mind. Muslim split to two paths. So there are AlQaeda, Nusrat, etc. From there emerge Islamization of Knowledge to response the failure of modernization. Islamization not differ profane and secular. 

I believe today you have challenges, take Islam as the religion of God as it is. Remember one thing, taxi driver vs priest.

