# NOTES OF THESIS
## UST NURHADI
- [ ] Focus your criticism to Alfred Adler.
- [ ] Chapter 4 still discuss variables and elaboration in chapter 3a (metaphysical concept in IP), 3b (tracing metaphysical concept in IP),
- [ ] Chapter 4 only the core of analysis, only in point (C) in seven pages
- [ ] Ch 4 Discussing the view of Alfred in the perspective of Worldview of Islam
- [ ] 4a criticism on social feeling, breakdown the fundamental ideas
- [ ] 4b criticism on feeling of inferiority, the strength and weakness of his view, appreciate the correct views, criticize the wrong ones
- [ ] You only describe, not discussion and criticize
- [ ] Erase chapter 3: metaphysic in self thought, it’s irrelevant
- [ ] The core analysis only in 7 pages (!?) shame on you
- [ ] Erase the Metaphysic in History of Thought, you write thesis, not a book
- [ ] CH3 should discuss the metaphysical elements of IP, take them from CH4abc
- [ ] CH4ab is not analysis, do not describe, it must be analyzed elaborative, expanded in detail, deep analysis.
- [ ] Find the acceptable elements of IP to be integrated in Islamic Psychology.

## Ust Moh. Lathief
- [ ] Is there any metaphysics of psychology, while they’re atheist?
- [ ] Point out clearly to reader what and how the metaphysical concept of Adler’s theories
- [ ] Clear up the structure, management, and writing system 
- [ ] What is IP? big house with pillars? what are the pillars? Define it, clarify the structure and connections, and DRAW diagram and mind map to make it clear which is the metaphysical concepts in CH3. Focus on ALFRED only
- [ ] CH4 supposed to be longer and talk more about the analysis. Mention the elements and use Worldview of Islam to determine whether it is right or wrong, not merely focus on the wrong points.


### SO, WHAT TO DO NOW…?
- [ ] BEFORE ANYTHING: read some samples of good analysis.
- [ ] CH2: DEFINE IP clearly, what is IP, what are the elements, talk more in depth with descriptive style, use DIAGRAM to make it clear
	- [ ] ERASE METAPHYSICS IN HISTORY, or put its description in CH2
- [ ] CH3: CLARIFY which elements are the metaphysical ones. 
	- [ ] Feeling of Inferiority
	- [ ] Striving for Superiority
	- [ ] Fictional Finalism
	- [ ] ~~Community centric Values~~ (?) Social Interest and Community Feeling
	- [ ] Birth order HAS effect in subconscious minds
- [ ] CH4: Analyze and discuss each metaphysical elements based on the worldview of Islam
	- [ ] Feeling of Inferiority: How Islam saw them? Is it similar to tawadhu’ and tadzallul? Any appreciable points? Is it wrong?
	- [ ] Striving for Superiority? Does Islam encourage it? Isn’t it tasabuq ilal khayr? What’s the difference? Is it kind of jihad and Ihsan? Is it possible to be appreciated?
	- [ ] Fictional Finalism: Isn’t it similar to Raja’? What’s the danger of agreeing FF?
	- [ ] Community Feeling and Social Interest (?), Islam support ukhuwah Islamiyah, right? Why should it be taken with caution? What’s the dangerous side of using Community Feeling and Social Interest?