HOW TO WRITE THESIS-RESEARCH

Bravo, Professor Carr! Below are my notes that I think might benefit others. Key points:
1. don't procrastinate;
2.  review the notes and renew the literature search;
3. determine who your audience is - most likely reviewers, so get their concerns firstly addressed; 
4. create the outline and get the big picture done, i.e., complete the first draft while resisting the temptation to correct and edit as you go; the logical sequence of data/tables/figures may be the outline; while writing the first draft, take notes indicating what references might be needed and would be about, but don't stop to collect the references;
5. begin with the easier part of the task - experimental section rather then the introduction; then follows the results and discussion section; 
6. then comes the really hard part - critical editing where you make sure that the English is coherent and the science is correct;  
7. write the conclusion in a numbered format;  
8. then comes the abstract and the acknowledgements; 
9. 9. now comes the introduction, the two most important things to address in which are the purpose and relevant background; 
10. then collect the references.
	
Some final notes: 1. always check the manuscript requirements for the journal of interests. 2. a few references on writing. Please refer to the video.

Really, the best advice I can give anyone writing a research paper is to KNOW YOUR TOPIC. Read and read and read and read and read and read about it. Read weeks before you're going to write it. Read in between meals, when you're in commute, waiting for a friend in a cafe - just read. Don't even think of the structure or the content. Just read everything you can find about it and bookmark everything. Finally, when you know the topic by heart, when you can discuss ,it and talk about it without even needing to look at the original articles and sources, you'll find that writing the paper would come naturally to you. You'll be able to form important discussion points just from what you read - all because you understood what you're writing about. Then you can begin going through your sources, jotting down notes, highlighting key elements you want to use to support your statements. You won't have a hard time piecing them together because you're working from the top down rather than trying to put puzzle pieces together and seeing what fits to form a narrative. tldr: READ
